Okay, welcome.
I'd like to start our next session.
And it is my pleasure to
introduce Andreas Wenkker.
So good afternoon, everybody,
and welcome to the last
WebObjects session for the day.
My name is Andreas Wendker,
and I'm one of the managers in
the WebObjects engineering team.
And in this session,
I would basically like to continue
what we started in the previous
session and add some more details to
the information about Java Client.
So let me just start by summarizing
quickly what Java Client is.
So Java Client is a very,
very powerful technology to create
distributed desktop applications.
And right now, Java Client is based on a
three-tier architecture.
So that means that for your application,
you have to maintain
three different pieces.
You have the client application,
you have a WebObjects
application that's in the middle,
and you have a database.
The client is based on Swing.
It's pure Java.
It's platform independent,
which is great.
The communication between the client
and the server is usually HTTP.
What that really means for you
is that you get the connectivity
of an HTML-based application,
but you have an opportunity to
add a much richer user interface.
What we announced several times earlier
this week is that going forward,
we're looking at adding
two-tier support to Java Client.
Tony has asked me to just
spend a couple minutes on that.
I don't have slides for that,
so I just improvised a little bit.
I hope it's helpful anyway for you.
The four topics I wanted to cover
originally was how you can get
the most out of Interface Builder.
I wanted to talk about options
when you deploy your client.
I wanted to talk about some
details of the distribution layer,
how it really works.
And then most importantly, I guess,
how you can make these
applications secure.
Because you can probably imagine
that with all three-tier systems,
which have rich clients,
that you open the door for a lot of
remote method invocations on your server.
And knowing how to make it
secure is quite important.
Before I go into these topics,
I will just talk quickly
about the two-tier support.
What we do in Java Client
is that we have a full
EUF environment on the client side.
So we have an EU control layer
where your business logic lives,
we have an interface layer,
and we have a database access layer,
or something like that.
The one that you're usually used to
use on the server side is EU access.
That's the object-relational
mapping layer that goes and
generates the SQL for you,
talks to the database,
and then maps the raw data from
the database into business objects.
And on the client side, in Java Client,
we use a layer that is actually very
similar from the API perspective.
But instead of talking to a database,
it goes and talks to the
WebObjects application server,
and then fetches the objects
through the application server.
So that's the three-tier system.
And the problem with that is,
I think it's a great technology,
and it's very useful if
you care about security.
So if you have a fairly
distributed environment,
you have potentially end users
that are outside your own company,
then the three-tier system gives
you all the necessary hooks to
make the application still secure.
Because the application server
in the middle is the one that
controls the access to the database.
And none of the clients can
access the database directly.
So it's a very secure layer,
or architecture.
But the downside of it is that
there's obviously this additional
communication you have to go through.
And so you might see some performance...
The Java Client is incredibly fast.
It's the fastest three-tier
architecture I've ever seen.
But still,
having this additional layer in
the middle might be problematic.
So going two-tier will allow
you to write applications that
have faster response times.
And also the second item or issue we
will address with two-tier is that
your administration gets much simpler.
Instead of having to
write a single layer,
you can write a whole new layer.
So it's a very, very simple process.
Instead of having to
maintain three pieces,
now you just have to
worry about two pieces.
You just write one set of business logic,
not two sets, those kind of things.
So I'd like to give a quick demo,
so if you could switch
to the demo one machine.
Okay.
Basically what I thought doing
is create two projects for you.
One with the three-tier system
and one with the two-tier system.
And I'll show you that they,
from the client perspective,
really look the same.
And then maybe go through the
differences in the project.
So let me start by creating a
direct-to-Java client application,
which is the old three-tier setup.
And I'll just give it a name.
These are the usual WebObjects questions.
I will add our Java real
estate framework that we use
throughout the conference here.
This is a fairly usual
WebOptics application.
It has an application class,
it has a session class,
it has a direct action class,
just the normal template.
I'll talk about that later.
It's building the project right now,
and then it will start the client.
This is the client setting up right now.
And that's the application it generates,
and I think you've seen
that in the session before,
or otherwise last year.
So let me now go ahead and
create another project,
which is a direct-to-swing application.
Also, this is the two-tier setup.
[Transcript missing]
I need to find my frameworks here.
Is this error tree?
One second.
I refined it.
So I'll just add the model directly.
And then again,
if you ask me whether I want to
build and launch the project now,
we'll do that.
And then we'll start the application.
And this is what you get.
So from the client perspective here,
the applications really
behave exactly the same.
So you can perform your
searches the normal way.
Everything is the same.
You can open this,
look at some details for listing.
I can do the same with
the two-tier client.
Andreas Wenkert,
and you will see it really behaves
identically from the user perspective.
So what we really do is we really just
switch one part of the architecture.
We just switch the distribution layer,
which usually goes and talks
to the WebObjects application
server to get the data.
We swap it out to use uAccess that
talks directly to the database.
And everything else is actually the same.
So including the root system,
which we use for direct-to-Java Client,
and that's why these applications
really just look the same way.
You can use interface files, Nib files,
if you don't want to use
direct-to-Java Client,
you can do all that
in both architectures.
The same Nib file will actually
work for a two-tier application
and a three-tier application.
Even something like having a setup
where you have a local database
and you have another database
somewhere running in your company,
and you want to talk to the local
database if you're not in the network,
but you want to talk to the
large company-wide database
if you're in the network.
Something like that is certainly
possible that you basically
just check at startup time,
am I connected right now or not,
and then you just choose either
EU distribution or EU access.
So this is all possible,
and from the level up, EU control,
EU interface, EU application,
EU generation, all these layers,
the functionality will
really be the same.
Your code will work
in both architectures.
So that's basically everything I wanted
to say about the two-tier stuff.
Can I just see kind of a show of
hands whether that's approximately
what you guys expected,
or do you want me to talk
more about that right now,
or shall we just wait
for question and answers?
Yes, okay.
Right.
So the question was,
we have two different project types here,
and the question is whether we can
basically make this a runtime check,
whether it's two-tier, three-tier.
Yes, technology-wise, that would work.
Project builder-wise,
we would probably not
support that out of the box.
So you would have to do a
little bit of setup by hand,
because I don't think it's
going to be very common.
But technology-wise, that should work.
Okay, so I suggest that then if
you go back to the slides,
I would just continue with my
presentation and then maybe
we can cover a little more at
the end in the Q&A section.
So I have to turn this around.
Now, Besity talked about that.
So now I have to play
around a little bit.
Sorry.
So I wanted to start out by
explaining some more details,
or by talking a little more
about interface builder.
So the two ways you can
generate user interfaces for
Java Client are direct-to-Java
Client and interface files.
Direct-to-Java Client is rule-based,
code-free.
We recommend this as the default way,
or as your starting point, at least,
for the development process,
because it just saves you a lot of time.
It's much easier.
You make progress much faster.
We understand that the default
applications won't give you the
polished application that you
want to deploy to your customers,
so we have a bunch of
customization techniques.
One of these customization techniques
is using Interface Builder and
creating interface files by hand.
If you don't like the root system at all,
you can also just create an application
just using Interface Builder and not
using any of the dynamic UI generation.
But a question that we
hear quite common is,
why in the world are you
guys using Interface Builder?
Because it doesn't do swing, right?
Interface Builder is a tool that you
can use to create Cocoa applications
and maybe Carbon applications,
but it's not generating swing libfiles.
The answer to that is actually not easy.
The answer is that, unfortunately,
to automate the user interfaces and to do
all the work that EOF is doing for you,
we need very rich connections.
The connections are called associations,
and they are really
multi-aspect connections.
For one widget, it's not just a point,
an outlet to something else.
There are multiple aspects to it,
what kind of value you want to show,
and which condition you want to show.
So, for example,
if you have a project that's
running on a Java project,
and you want to show it to a user,
you can show it to a user,
and then you can show it to a user.
you want to enable or
disable that widget,
what kind of colors you want to use,
whether you want to highlight
it with a certain color,
the text, something like that.
And InterfaceBuilder, unfortunately,
is still the only tool
available to us that allows to
create these rich connections.
There's really no other GUI editor
in the Java world that allows
us to do these connections.
If you find one, let me know.
Until then, we
Interface Builder is actually
not a bad choice for us,
especially since we can leverage what
we do for the Cocoa integration as well.
I'd actually like to ask Norbert
to come up on stage and quickly
give a demonstration of that so
that we can see some more details.
So what Norbert will do for us is
he will create an application that
doesn't use direct-to-Java Client,
just an interface file.
We have an assistant for that in
Project Builder to create a new project.
We enter a name.
These are the standard
questions that we always get.
Here we are also at the
Java Real Estate Business Logic Framework
.
And then what's different to the
assistant that we saw before is that
he had asked for a class name for a
so-called interface controller class.
I will talk about that in a second.
These are just the same questions.
And then here it gets different.
So when we create Nib files,
Project Builder basically gives
us an assistant that helps with
the most common cases where we
create something like simple
tables or master detail interfaces.
So what Norbert will do is, I think,
choose the listing entity as the
master table or master entity,
and choose a couple of properties
to be displayed in this table,
like the listing number,
maybe the asking price.
The system will ask for some form fields.
The first question was about what
kind of properties to use for a table,
and then we create form
fields for us as well.
And then it will ask us for
master detail relationship,
and then what kind of properties for
the detail relationship to display.
So we just choose the last name and
the first name of all the customers.
And that's it.
So as you can see,
the assistant generated a
project with a Nib file.
And this is the Nib file it generated,
so I'll just make that
a little more pretty.
Save that, and then we will, I guess,
build the project and run it.
So one thing that is interesting
about the assistant is that,
together with the interface file,
it actually generated a Java class,
which is a so-called
EO Interface Controller subclass.
And that's basically a class that
is there for your convenience.
It makes it very easy.
It's a very easy entry
point in your source code,
how you can load the interface file
and then to play around with it.
So, nobody's running the
application there right now.
So this is the application running,
and what we wanted to do is basically
overlay that with the file we
created in Interface Builder,
and then show you how this
translation works from Cocoa to
Swing that we performed for you.
So basically what Norbert is doing
there right now is he's showing
you the file in Interface Builder
on top of the running application,
and the file in Interface
Builder is Cocoa,
and the application in
the background is Swing.
So as you can see,
it overlaps pretty well, and yeah,
so that's basically
all we wanted to show.
Thank you, Norbert.
Okay, if you could go back to the slides.
So this interface file
translation from Swing to Cocoa,
as you saw, works pretty well.
But unfortunately, it only works well for
the pieces that we expect.
It works well for all the
standard widgets that we deal
with in the EU interface layer,
like tables, text fields, buttons,
those kind of things.
The Nib first installation doesn't
do a very good job when it comes
to additional widgets that we don't
support by default in EU interface.
We just basically ignore those things.
And also, Swing and Cocoa don't
always match perfectly.
So some of the aspects
that you can adjust in,
some of the parameters you can adjust
in Interface Builder don't make it into
the Swing version of the interface file.
And I wanted to give you a couple of
tips that you can use to work with the
interface files and get more out of it.
So, what you should know is that
there's basically a method on
the EU Interface Controller class
which is called LoadArchive.
And LoadArchive is the method that
triggers loading an interface file.
The good news for you is that you
don't ever have to invoke that.
It's done for you, well,
there's one case where you might want to.
But in the normal case,
you don't invoke this method.
It's done for you automatically
whenever this interface controller
is integrated into the application.
It's asked to basically show
the window on the screen.
And if you trigger that,
it'll automatically for you.
But the methods that are interesting
for you are two additional methods.
One is controllerDidLoadArchive,
and it's there right now.
And in the next release,
we are planning to add another method,
which is controllerWillLoadArchive.
controllerDidLoadArchive,
as the name says,
is invoked after the libfile
loading is completed,
and willLoadArchive will
be invoked right before.
This is useful for you if you basically
want to start an interface builder,
create all the common
widgets like tables,
text fields, buttons, what I just listed,
and then basically programmatically
complete this Nib file.
We find that interface builder,
even if it doesn't cover maybe
100% of your user interface needs,
it will still be a great
starting point for you,
as long as we cover it in
our Nib file translation.
So with these two methods here,
you will be able to then take an
interface that is at least close
to be 100% of your user interface,
and then programmatically customize that.
What you would typically do is you
would probably search for some objects
that you loaded from the Nib file,
and then send some methods to it to maybe
change colors or certain parameters.
Or sometimes you might place
something like a placeholder view,
just an empty view inside your interface
file to basically mark a position,
and then add additional views in there.
So if you want to integrate a swing
view that somebody wrote that is not
covered by our Nib file translation,
you just place an empty view
somewhere in the Nib file,
say this is the position,
the size it should be.
Then at runtime,
you would load that Nib file,
look for this empty view,
and place your own view inside.
And the two ways that you can
use to identify objects are
outlets and named objects.
So outlets is basically a name
that comes from the Cocoa word,
and outlet is basically a
reference to another object.
So what you would do is typically
on your EU interface class,
you would create an instance variable,
and then you would connect
that in Interface Builder,
and you would say this
is my placeholder view,
and then while the
interface file is loaded,
this reference is filled in,
and then in Control-Edit Load Archive,
you can add your own views to it.
And the other way you have to
identify objects is to give it a name.
Interface Builder allows you to
provide names for some of the objects,
not for every object,
but typically for all the
objects in the file window,
like display groups, editing context,
the windows itself.
So for those,
you can specify a name in the
Inspector in Interface Builder,
and then we actually provide you a
dictionary of all the named objects as
an argument to Control-Edit Load Archive.
So outlets and giving it a name are ways
to identify the objects in the archive.
Another thing that might be interesting
to use is that these two methods,
or this API,
should also allow you to plug in other
GUI editors if you really want to.
So there are various tools out
there for swing that usually
do source code generation,
so you can use that to place
buttons and text fields,
all this stuff.
They usually don't offer
you to do these connections.
You will not be able to create
associations in these GUI editors.
But if you prefer that over
using interface builder and
the Nib for translation,
use those tools and then use these
methods to plug those user interfaces
into your controllers and then
create the associations by hand.
It's really up to you
what you want to choose.
So once you've created your application
and you want to go into deployment,
there are a couple of
things you should know.
First of all, the only requirement that
we have is just J2SE,
the standard edition, 1.3.1, and up.
If you're one of the
lucky users of Mac OS X,
then that's the version that's
integrated into Mac OS X right now.
Otherwise,
you're obviously downloaded from Sun.
But J2SE is the only
requirement that we have.
And there are basically two options
for you to deploy right now.
One is you create a little
desktop application,
which means that you create a
little start program and put
all your classes in a Java file,
pre-install it on the client machine,
and then the user can
start it per double-click.
And the other way is
to run it as an applet,
so then the application is embedded
in an HTML page and the user
runs it from inside the browser.
Let me compare these two
options for you quickly.
So the biggest advantage of
Applets is really how easy the
simplicity of the installation
and potentially upgrading process,
because there is no such process.
When Applets starts up,
they always download all the classes
they need to this client machine,
and then the program is executed there.
And when the application is
quit or the browser quits,
the classes are basically thrown away.
And the next time the
application starts up,
it downloads them again.
Which means that if you deploy
a new version in the meantime,
it will automatically download
this latest version for you.
The desktop applications are
unfortunately not that easy because you
have to create a little startup program.
You have to pre-install these
classes on the client machine.
So in the worst case,
if you can't control
your user base very well,
you might even have to deal with
multiple client versions out there.
So that's the biggest
disadvantage of applications.
There's one interesting thing
that we introduced in the last
release in WebObjects 5.1.
We now provide you a class loader.
We're just able to download all the
application-specific classes that you
write yourself to desktop applications.
So what this allows you to do is
basically deploy the UF-based system,
which
[Transcript missing]
But then,
once the application is started up,
from the user perspective,
the performance of applications
is much better than for applets.
First of all,
obviously the startup time is much
shorter because the classes are
already present on the client side.
And then you will also find that it
runs a little bit faster because there's
usually no security manager in place,
and browsers don't do their
own thing with the applets.
So it really runs a little bit faster.
It's not a big difference,
but probably a couple percent.
More important is that the user
experience is just much better
than desktop applications,
because the desktop applications
are really embedded in the
normal operating system desktop.
So they run as standard-owned processes.
You can see the application
in the dock on Mac OS X.
If need be,
you can quit them individually or
kill them individually if they hang.
You have access to the services menu.
All these things are there,
so the user experience is
really much better for desktop
applications than for applets.
Since they run isolated,
The stability is also much better.
Applets that are, if multiple applets run
on the client machine,
they all share the same
VM inside that browser.
And that can obviously have all
kinds of negative side effects on
both performance and stability.
When it comes to security restrictions,
it's not that easy.
From your perspective as the developer,
you would probably prefer to write
desktop applications because there
will be no security manager in place,
so you don't have to worry
about accessing the file system,
getting security exceptions,
those kind of things.
From your perspective, that's nice.
For applets,
there might be a lot of problems.
Users will probably see,
and that's why the app
that's got a little dot here,
is that users might have a little
different perspective on that
because they know that for applets,
the VM will enforce security for them.
They will know that the
application can mess around,
that their file system delete files,
those kind of things.
So they might actually prefer running
these applications as an applet.
One last thing that's handy for
desktop applications is that you have
the ability to tune VM parameters
individually for each application.
While all the applets share all the same
settings and you can really control them,
you know exactly how you will
start the desktop application.
So if you have the need for large
heap sizes or you give it a lot
of images and a lot of memory,
you can do that with
desktop applications.
You will probably have many,
many problems with applets.
So we're pretty happy
with desktop applications,
and as long as you can deal with the
installation and upgrading process,
we think it's probably the
best way for you to deploy it.
And applets, we think,
are pretty fragile, and in general,
we think there's probably a
pretty dark future for applets,
because, as you all know,
Windows XP doesn't support Java anymore,
so we don't really expect a lot of
applets to be written in the future.
So the good news is that our friends
at Sun have recognized it as well,
and they're actually in the
process of providing us with a
great replacement for applets,
and that replacement is called WebStart.
WebStart is basically a new
technology from Cyan which
will be part of the JDK 1.4.
And it's already available as
an optional package for JDK 1.3.
If you're actually using Mac OS 10.1
with the latest Java update,
WebStart is already
integrated into Mac OS X.
So that's a good thing.
The idea behind WebStart is that
you as the developer create a nice
entry page in HTML that the user
can navigate to in the browser.
And then on this HTML page,
there's a special hyperlink
that will trigger WebStart.
When the user presses this hyperlink,
WebStart will download the
classes to the client machine,
but then it will start the
application outside the browser
as a standalone process.
So it's not going to be
embedded in the browser anymore.
It's now running outside the browser.
and I think the biggest advantage
of WebStart is that it solves
the upgrade problem for you.
WebStart actually tracks the version
numbers or the version of the
Java classes that you need on the
client side and it will automatically
detect the next time the client
starts up that there's a new
version available for the Java files
and then it will download them.
So what WebStart does is it
actually caches the Java files,
wants to download them on the client
machine and then when the client starts
up the next time it will go and check
with the server quickly whether there's
a new version available and if it is
it will download the new version but
otherwise it will use the cached version.
So that's really great.
It's very elegant.
Can we keep that until Q&A?
Great, thank you.
and it gets even better.
WebStart really has a nice
solution for the security issue.
Instead of relying on settings for
applets that are for all applets,
security settings,
the user can grant permissions
individually for each application.
So basically the applications tell
WebStart that they either need
access to the file system or not.
And then if they do,
WebStart will bring up a panel
before the application launches.
We ask the user,
do you want to give permission
to this application or not?
And that's individual
for each application.
And also WebStart requires,
if the application wants
access to the file system,
wants to run outside the sandbox,
it will require all the Java files
for this application to be signed.
And that doesn't really prevent
the application from doing
something bad on that machine.
But what we always say is it gives
a better illusion of security.
At least people can decide.
whether they want to
trust the vendors or not.
WebStart also comes with a
little manager application.
This application basically allows
you to see information about the
application that has been started before.
You keep all that in mind.
Then you can start applications
right out of the WebStart manager
without going back to the HTML page,
the entry page.
These managers also allow
you to create shortcuts.
I believe for the next
version on Mac OS X,
the WebStart manager will
allow you to create shortcuts.
You can create shortcuts for
the applications that you
can then place in the dock.
On Windows,
the WebStart manager allows you to
create shortcuts for the applications.
Basically,
once the user downloads the application,
they can then create little shortcuts,
and it feels much better and much simpler
to navigate to the application again.
They don't have to type in a
URL again and those kind of things.
All you have to do if you want to deploy
an application through WebStart is
you have to create a JNLP file.
This JNLP file stores all the
information that WebStart needs,
so the application name, the version,
description for it, who the vendor is,
the home page,
the entry page for this application,
and then a list of all the Java files.
So we think WebStart is terrific.
And going forward,
what we would like to do is we would
probably deprecate applet support so it
will still be there in the next version,
but long term we are
planning to remove it.
As an alternative,
we will integrate WebStart as
a deployment option.
We will do that in a way
that is very automatic,
so that you don't even have to
write the JNLP file by hand.
We will do that all for you.
When your parameters change,
your Java files change,
we will update the JNLP file
automatically for you.
Thanks.
We also changed our templates in
Project Build a little bit to reflect
that now you need an entry page in
HTML and then a page that basically
configures your client application.
What that means is that this deployment
matrix changes to something like this.
Applets, as I said, will be deprecated,
and then WebStart will be a new option.
We think that it's really great,
especially for the
installation upgrade process,
and that it handles security very well.
We think WebStart is a
really good solution,
probably the best compromise.
The only downside is still that,
at least for the first time,
customers need to
download the application,
so there's a long installation or there's
a long startup time the first time.
Also, there's still a security
manager in place with WebStart,
so the application will also perform
a little slower than a desktop
application without all these things.
So I'd like Norbert to
come up again on stage,
and we'd like to show
you our WebStart support.
So we create a new project again,
and this time I think we just do a
direct-to-Java Client application.
Give it a name again.
[Transcript missing]
And then,
let's spend a couple seconds here.
So there's going to be a new page
in the Assistant going forward where
you have to enter three values,
an application name,
a reasonable application
name for the client side,
who you are, the vendor name,
and then a description.
This is going to be the same
for Direct-to-Java Client and
NIP-Fi-based Java Clients.
The application project is compiling
right now and the server is starting up.
Then it will, like usual,
start the desktop
application for us again.
So this time we will just quit the
desktop application right away,
and instead we will
navigate to the browser.
We just paste in the URL.
So it's a fairly simple page.
We will rely on you to make that pretty.
But basically, there's this hyperlink,
and if Norbert clicks on that,
then WebStart will fire up.
It will download the JNAP file quickly.
And then WebStart comes up.
So here it's downloading.
That was too quick.
That's okay.
Just quit again and do it one more time.
WebStart starts with the
download of the classes,
the Java files,
and then checking for versions.
It's pretty quick right now because
we are on the same machine here,
but if you're on the Internet,
it will take a little longer.
But then basically you get
the normal application.
There's really no
difference for the user.
The nice thing about this is you really
don't have to worry about deploying as a
desktop application or through WebStart.
As you saw, both of it is just supported
right out of the box,
and it's just up to the user to
choose the right deployment mechanism.
Norbert is right now on Project Builder,
and I just wanted to show
you quickly that now the new
projects have two components.
There's the main component,
just with the hyperlink.
You can make this really pretty
and put your own company logo
there and all these things.
Norbert goes to the source code.
The link is basically bound to
a method on the main component.
And if you show that,
then you will find that there's
The static method that we provide to
you on the VoJava Client component,
which generates the right link,
the URL for the link for you.
So this is the way for you to
integrate JNLP links into your pages.
Pretty straightforward.
And then there's the
Java Client component,
which looks very similar to
the ones that we had before.
In earlier times,
there was the VoJava Client applet.
Now there's the VoJava Client component,
and they're all the same bindings,
like the application class name,
what interface files to use.
There are a couple of
additional bindings,
obviously, for WebStart,
like the application name,
what you entered in
ProjectBit and the assistant.
Okay.
Thank you.
If you go back to the slides.
Okay, so for the rest of the session,
I want to spend some time
on the distribution layer.
And the one thing,
the one message about the
distribution layer is it's fast.
For a three-tier system, it's really,
really fast.
The reason why it's fast is that it
uses a copy distribution mechanism.
What that means is that when
you fetch objects from the
server to the client side,
the objects are copied to the client,
and then they live there on the
client side as fully functioning
objects in your EOF stack.
So most other technologies create,
do something like with stubs.
So usually their clients use some
kind of placeholder objects that
go and talk to the server all
the time for every little detail,
right?
And maybe they do some
smart things with caching,
but what you would find with these
other technologies is that they
have a lot of communication going
on between client and server.
So in our world,
if you really just copy the client,
you can actually do a lot
of things with the client.
So in our world,
if you really just copy the client,
you can actually do a lot
of things with the client.
So in our world,
if you really just copy the client,
you can actually do a lot
of things with the client.
plot the optics to decline and then
the lift and you editing context and
you can do all the things that you
used to do in the u_s_ validation
you know if you say input um...
[Transcript missing]
This is just a little
architectural diagram.
The left side here shows the client side.
The right side shows the
WebObjects application.
And again, what I wanted to point out
is just the control layer,
the EU control layer,
which is the layer in EUF that
you work with most of the time,
the layer that you use for
writing your business logic,
that exists in identical form on
the client and the server side.
And you only get different
behavior because there's another
layer plugged in from underneath.
Instead of EU access,
which is used on the server side,
you use the EU distribution layer.
And again,
the communication between client
and server is usually through HTTP.
There are four object classes in the
distribution layer that make this happen.
On the client side, there's the so-called
UDistributedObjectStore,
and then the UDistributionChannel.
And UDistributionChannel is
actually an abstract class and
usually uses a concrete subclass,
which is the UHTTP channel.
On the server side,
there's the so-called VoJavaClientApplet.
The name might be a little confusing.
This is actually not an applet,
it's a Vo component that
generates the HTML for an applet.
And as you heard just a minute ago,
we will replace that going forward with
this so-called VoJavaClientComponent,
which basically has
the same functionality,
it just doesn't generate applets anymore.
It's specialized for WebStart now.
And the fourth object also on the
server side is the UDistributionContext.
So I'd like to talk about these
four objects for a few minutes.
Let's start on the client side
with the DistributedObjectStore.
[Transcript missing]
To plug in this EU distribution
layer on the client side,
we just use a different kind
of object store for the parent
for the editing context.
And that's this
EU distributed object store.
So it takes the place of the
EU database context that you
usually use on the server side,
and becomes the parent of the
editing context on the client side.
To you,
that should be pretty transparent.
You hardly ever write code,
or at least you should
hardly ever write code,
against objects in the
EU access layer directly.
The EU access layer
deals with SQL for you.
You don't have to worry about this.
The objects that you deal with are
the objects in the EU control layer,
and that's most of the
EU editing context.
So this should be a change that will
just happen pretty transparently for you.
The distributed object store
then uses an object that's called
the EU distribution channel.
The EU distribution channel is the object
that implements the concrete protocol to
communicate between client and server.
It basically gets a stream of data,
and it's supposed to transfer that
to the server side in some form,
and then read the result back.
And the channel that we ship by default,
the concrete subclass,
is EU HTTP channel.
That's the one that you usually use.
The advantages of this
architecture here is that these
objects are actually separated.
The channel is not integrated
in the object store,
so that you can plug in
a different behavior.
You can use your own distribution
channel subclass to change the way
you communicate with the server.
Very common use cases for that are
adding security or adding SSL support,
basically.
You might also choose to do IIOP channels
or whatever is in your mind.
I guess the most common
case is to do SSA.
So this distribution of the
channel basically takes data and
sends it over to the server side.
And on the server side,
the object that listens to these remote
method invocations is the component,
the VoJava Client applet,
and later going forward,
the VoJava Client component,
that you use to configure
the client-side parameters.
So that's actually the real
object listening to the requests.
But it doesn't really do anything
with these three requests.
It just forwards them to
the distribution context.
So again, there's an architecture.
This is not one object class so that
you can plug in different behavior.
You can choose to write a subclass
of the EU distribution context.
The distribution context
is the object that really
performs the EUF-related work.
It's the object that then basically goes
to the editing context on the server
side and fetches objects and saves,
fires faults, those kind of things.
So these four classes really make
the distribution layer happen.
To make this a little simpler to you,
I think the best way to think about
the distribution layer is simply that
the editing context on the client side
behaves like nested editing context to
the editing context on the server side.
If you think a little
bit about object stores,
what the distribution layer does,
basically it connects the editing
context from the client to the
editing context on the server side.
The editing context on the server
side basically behaves like the parent
object store to the client side.
One thing that's important with
our HTTP channel is that it's
an unidirectional connection.
It's not a bidirectional connection.
What you typically find in a WebObjects
application is that once a change
comes down from one object store,
from one editing context,
gets saved to the database,
all the other editing contexts
in that same application are
synchronized with the changes you made.
And that's automatic.
But in our model here,
that doesn't work because you can't
push back changes through HTTP.
There has to be a request.
It has to be pulled from the client.
So what we do in the distribution layer
is that we keep track of all the changes,
and the next time the client connects,
we will synchronize the
changes on the server side.
So if you have multiple client
applications running through
the same application server,
and one client makes a change,
it will be saved to the database,
and the other clients will be
synchronized with that state,
the next time they connect.
And then potentially it
might even have to do with
optimistic locking errors or so,
but they are the normal ways
in EUF how you deal with that.
So what do you need to
know about security?
Obviously, the moment you have clients,
rich clients that can go to
the server and fetch data and
save change to the database,
that opens up potentially
a lot of security holes.
So the most important mechanism for you
to make your application secure is what
we call business logic partitioning,
and I'll talk a lot about that.
The second thing you need to
know is that on the server side,
there's a delegate to the distribution
context that has full control over
every remote method invocation.
So the delegate to the distribution
context is the object that you really
use to make the application secure
if you care about every individual
invocation and if business logic
partitioning is not good enough.
The third thing you need to know is
that if you want a secure connection,
right now you would have to subclass
our EU HTTP channel and then use
additional packages like JSSE or so
from some to create secure sockets.
We actually showed a
demonstration of that last year,
so if you can go back to
the DVDs from last year,
there's even some source
code how to do that.
Otherwise,
maybe you can come to me afterwards
and I can point you to that code.
Let's talk about business
logic partitioning.
What business logic partitioning
means is that you can choose
whether you want to use identical
business logic implementations on
the client side and the server side,
or whether you want to use specific
implementations on client and server.
In greater detail,
what you can do is you can
choose two different classes
to represent your objects on
the client and the server side.
And you can limit or restrict the view
of the client to a subset of properties.
So if there's something like a
password field in a user object,
you can simply say that this is not
supposed to be visible on the client,
and the distribution layer will make
sure that it's never sent to the client,
so it's not visible to the client.
So business logic is very
important for security,
and it's actually also very
important for performance,
because, at least what I hear from
several of the customers,
from several of you guys,
is that to create a successful
three-tier application,
you have to be fairly
careful about sending data,
or too much data, to the client side.
Often you can avoid sending data
to the client just because you
will never display it there.
Often you're just interested
in some derived information,
something like an average value.
If you wanted, for example,
to have a list of departments,
and then the average salary of all
the employees in that department.
So instead of sending all the
employee objects to the client side,
and then performing the average
computation on the client side,
it's much better for you to just
compute that on the server side,
and just send the entry side over,
and avoid that you send
all these employee objects.
And from what I hear from you is
actually that that's the key to have a
successful implementation in Java Client,
that you make sure that you
don't send too much data.
If you want the response
times to be reasonably low,
or small,
then you need to make sure that you
only send the data to the client
that you really need to send.
And if you don't display it there,
if you don't need it for any
computation on the client,
keep it on the server side.
Another advantage of doing that,
by the way,
is that you can use a class if you
have a fairly secure algorithm that,
for some reason, you don't want to be
visible on the client.
And keep in mind that with Java,
classes can be very easily decompiled,
so everybody can look
at your implementation.
If you don't want that,
you can force your client to talk to
the server for some of the operations.
That way,
you don't make your implementation
visible on the client side.
So the tool that you use to configure the
business logic partitioning is EOModeler.
And there's a column that
you're all familiar with,
which is the class name column.
And that's where you specify the class
that you want to use to represent
an object for a given entity.
And there's a little menu in the
lower left corner of the table view,
the Add Column pop-up menu there.
And that allows you to
reveal additional columns.
And there's one that is
not visible by default,
but if you do the Java Client,
you need to look at it.
It's just called Client-Side Class Name.
So here you can specify the class name
for the objects on the client side.
And as you can see in this example here,
for some of the entities,
I used the same class name.
And for some of them,
like the second one, the customer,
I'm using classes in different packages.
One is the example.serverCustomer,
and the other one is the clientCustomer.
So here I can choose different
classes for client and server.
The other thing that you're
interested in is the class properties.
If you look at an entity,
there's the column that
you're all familiar with,
which specifies which of these
attributes and relationships is
really part of your business object.
That's what we call a class property.
There's a second column you can reveal,
which is for the client side.
So here you can specify that the client,
for example,
has no access to the phone number,
I believe, and the member date.
And then also if you deal with
business logic partitioning,
there's some API that's
fairly important to you.
There are three methods
that you care about.
There's invoke remote method,
there's evade from client update,
and prepare values for client.
The first method is
used on the client side,
and the other two methods
are used on the server side.
Invoke remote method
[Transcript missing]
There's a fairly important
naming convention that we have.
And the naming convention is
that if the name of the method
starts with client-side request,
then we consider that a method that
is open for unrestricted access.
So we consider that a method that
can be invoked by any client.
If you don't follow
this naming convention,
you will actually have to go through
some extra code to enable that,
because by default,
we only allow methods that
follow these naming conventions.
We don't want to open
additional holes in your stack.
We don't want to allow clients
to invoke any method that
you don't intend to open up.
So that's why this naming
convention is fairly important.
One recommendation if you work
with business logic partitioning,
you use different classes on
the client and the server side,
is to not use two classes,
but actually three classes.
What we recommend is that you create
a common superclass in which you
implement all the shared functionality,
and you define all the methods that have
different implementations as abstract
methods on this common superclass,
and you use two complete subclasses,
one for the client, one for the server.
For example, a class secret here,
an abstract class,
and there's an abstract
method definition.
On the client side,
I could implement that to
simply go to the server.
So I would just use invoke remote method,
and that would basically just move the
method execution to the server side.
And on the server side,
the method secret value would
actually return a concrete value,
and then there's the
client side request method.
Let me go back one slide.
As you can see,
I follow the naming convention
client side request here.
So this is a method that's considered
open for unrestricted access that
just invokes the real method.
This might look a little complicated,
but it has a big advantage for you.
The advantage is that you
can write business logic code
against the abstract super class,
and that business logic code is usable
on both the client and the server side.
So it really increases the
reusability of your business logic.
If you use the secret class,
you can write some code,
and it will execute in the secret.
same form of client and server
side as long as you write it
against the abstract superclass.
So invoking remote
methods on EOs is fine,
and it's very, very important.
But in reality,
if you have a desktop application,
you will need to talk to the
server for reasons that are not
related to your business logic,
typically loading some resources or maybe
performing some user authentication,
those kind of things.
So we also have an API for that,
and this API is on the
EODistributedObject store.
So if you remember the
picture from before,
the EODistributedObject
store is the parent object
store of the editing context,
and the simplest way to find
it is to invoke a static
method on EU editing context,
default parent object store.
So that's the best way for you to
get to the distributed object store,
and there's an API that you can use
to perform application logic-specific
remote method invocations.
There are two methods that
are interesting to you.
One is called
invokeRemoteMethodWithKeyPath,
and the other one is called
invokeStatelessRemoteMethodWithKeyPath.
Let me go back one slide.
So the arguments to the first
one are an editing context,
a key path that will identify the
object on the server side-- I'll talk
about that in a second-- a method name,
and then the arguments.
The method invoke_remote,
or invoke_remote method with
keypath is a method that can
include enterprise objects.
So if you have a remote method
invocation that is somehow
related to your business objects,
then you can use this method here
on the distributed object store.
[Transcript missing]
We just introduced this
method in the last release,
by the way, so I don't think a lot
of you have seen this.
So WebOpt.js 5.1 introduced this method.
And the great advantage of it is,
by the way, that it's thread-safe,
so it's actually ideal
for some background tasks.
A common use case of this method is to
perform a background ping every five
minutes that checks with the server side,
are there any changes?
And if yes, then you actually fetch them.
So this is a fairly cheap method
that doesn't have the overhead
of the state-full remote method
invocation and just there's no
enterprise object in the communication.
So let's talk about how the object
on the server side is identified.
The argument to these methods
that identifies the server
side object is the key path.
It's a key path that's evaluated
relative to the distribution context.
A typical example is session.
You would specify a key path
starting with the distribution
context on the server side,
a key path that goes to the
target object on which you want
to invoke your remote method.
There are two special cases.
One is if you personalize the argument,
you try to invoke the method on
the distribution context itself.
That's mostly interesting if you use
subclasses of your distribution context.
If you pass an empty string,
then for your convenience,
if you have a registry on
the distribution context,
you can plug in additional
objects that want to listen
to remote method invocations.
So that's just a registry,
and if the key path is
just an empty string,
you just go through all the objects
in this registry and find the first
object in this registry that responds
to the method and then perform the
remote method invocation on that object.
So that's basically just a convenience
for you so that you can plug in
arbitrary remote method listeners.
It might be hard to register these
additional targets because every session
uses its own distribution context.
So distribution context come and
go together with the sessions.
So to make that easy for you,
we introduced a notification
that we sent out.
It's called your remote method
receiver needed notification.
Basically, in your application,
you can register for this notification.
and then when you receive it,
you receive it for a new
distribution context,
and then you register your
objects as invocation targets.
Again,
the naming convention client-set request
applies to both methods that are on
enterprise objects and to the application
logic-specific remote method invocations.
This confused me.
I think there's something missing now.
With all these remote method invocations,
again, if they follow the client-side
request naming convention,
we consider them open
for arbitrary access,
so they would just go through.
If you don't use this naming convention,
you have full control over
every single invocation,
and you have the control over these
invocations in the delegate of the
distribution context on the server side.
So you register a delegate object,
and then there are several methods
that we will send this delegate object,
and you can control either per
method name or for the key path,
which method invocations are allowed.
You have full access about which fetch
specifications the client can execute,
which faults the client can fire.
So this delegate is really the one
instance that you use to control
client on a fine-grained level.
Business logic partitioning
does the first.
It does a very good job as long as it
can describe the difference between
client and server in the schema,
but often you need more
fine-grained control.
For example, once a user logs in,
you might allow access
to certain objects,
certain fetch specifications.
You might want to enhance qualifiers
to limit the search results,
but those are not schema-based.
Those are really data-based,
and for those kind of things,
you use the delegate on
the distribution context.
And there's, again,
a notification that you can
use to set this delegate for
the distribution context,
because there will be many,
many distribution contexts
in your application,
one for each client.
And this notification is
your distribution context
instantiated notification,
so that's sent out, again,
when the distribution context is created.
So I'd like to ask Norbert
to come up on stage.
And what we'd like to do
is show you an example,
a couple of details,
of an example that we shipped
with the last release.
Attention WWDC 2002 attendees.
Hall 1, including the exhibitor
fair and internet cafe,
is now closed.
Please join us on the concourse for sex.
And then again at 6.30 in Hall 2
for the Apple Design Awards,
followed at 7.30 by Stumpy Experts.
Thank you.
[Transcript missing]
We added an example to the last release,
WebObjects 5.1,
which we call Discussion Board.
It's a Java Client example that
shows how to do authentication and
to use all these distribution context
delegate mechanisms to control
security on a fine-grained level.
Let us show you the application quickly.
It starts with a login panel,
and Norbert is logging in as
an administrator right now.
He gets a fairly standard Java Client UI.
As an administrator,
he can perform every single
operation that he wants.
He can search, open records, etc.
The editor menu items,
the tools menu called Logout.
It goes back to the login panel.
Norbert will log in as a normal user,
not as an administrator.
Then what you will see is that
There's a very customized UI,
so it's not a direct-to-Java
Client UI anymore.
So there's a subscriptions
window for the discussion board.
You can look at discussion
boards individually.
And there's also something
like a preferences panel.
So as you can see,
this UI really has nothing to do with
direct-to-Java Client standard UIs.
So we wanted to just show you a
couple of places in the source code
that might be interesting for you.
This is all in WebObjects 5.1,
so we don't want to show you too
many details because you can always
go back and look at it there,
but just a couple of places.
The way this example works is that
there's an object on the client side that
tracks the user authentication state,
and there's an object on the
server side that does the same,
and those two are obviously in sync.
The object on the server side
is actually the session object,
so that the user authentication is
handled for each individual client.
On the client side,
the authentication center,
that's the object class that controls
the authentication state there,
if the user logs out or logs in,
basically what happens is that
the startup sequence is played
again and again and again.
The startup sequence, in our world here,
basically means to get rid of all
the windows that were opened before.
It will forget all the objects,
all the EU enterprise objects
that were fetched before,
all these things will forget,
all the preferences values,
all these things.
Then, if you start this,
and we basically perform
the start sequence.
since this is a
direct-to-JavaClient application.
What happens is that if the
user is not authenticated,
the server will actually provide a
description for the client side that
says the windows that are there are the
login window and the registration panel.
Then once the user logs in,
the state is cleared up again,
and if you perform the
start sequence again,
and then the server decides again,
depending on the user who logged in,
what kind of UI to generate.
So for an administrator,
if you just create a
direct-to-Java Client UI,
and for a normal user,
if you create a very customized UI.
So as you can see,
the server really is the object that
controls what happens on the client side.
And we actually use all these methods,
the distribution context
delegate methods,
to control the individual
remote method invocations.
And one thing that we won't show you,
but it's there too,
is that we also make use of that in the
rule system for direct-to-Java Client.
Basically, since the user authentication
information is stored in the session,
we can use a key path starting from
the user authentication information.
So starting with the session,
something like session.isAdministrator,
in the rule system to decide
what kind of windows to generate
for direct-to-Java Client.
Okay, so the one-up method,
we wanted to show you
four places in the code.
The first method is, are there five?
Maybe there are five.
So it's called, in the authentication
center on the client side,
perform launch sequence.
That's the method you want to look at.
It's doing all the cleanup work,
closing all the windows,
invalidating all the objects,
invalidating all the UI information
retrieved for the controller factory,
so far.
And then, one method invocation that's
interesting here is factory.
I'll go back.
Okay.
There's this method, controller factory,
open default.
I'm going to scroll down a little bit.
It's at the bottom.
Activate default controllers.
So that's the method that
triggers the startup sequence
again on the controller factory.
So that might be interesting for you.
The other method, interesting,
is the method that actually
sends the user name and the
password to the server side.
And what we do here is we just do a
stateless remote method invocation,
and we send the name and the
password to the server side.
That arrives in the
session on the server side.
[Transcript missing]
So, again,
I think it's a very useful example.
I would recommend looking at
that if you're interested in
security with Java Client.
Thank you, Norbert.
Okay, so the conclusion for this talk,
just a quick summary.
So the things I'd like you to remember
is that the distribution layer is a very,
very efficient layer for, you know,
it's certainly slower than
a two-tier application,
but it's doing a very,
very good job for a
three-tier architecture.
The items about security that
you should remember are business
logic partitioning is your friend.
Business logic partitioning is
your best mechanism to control
what the client can see.
If you need finer-grained control,
you use a delegate for
the distribution context,
and if you want a secure connection,
you use a distribution channel subclass.
And then going forward,
we will deprecate,
or we are planning to deprecate
applet support in Java Client
and replace it with WebStart,
and from what I hear from you guys,
that's probably what you do anyway today.
So I guess I have a couple
of usual slides here.
The lab is closed now.
But you can go there tomorrow again.
The two sessions I would recommend
to you if you want to have more
information are 7.11 and 7.12.
They are about EUF.
One is about data modeling part,
and one is about how to
deal with synchronization
in EUF and things like that,
advanced enterprise object frameworks.
And then you can obviously beat
us up in the feedback session.
Who to contact?
Tony and Bob.
You've probably all seen that.
Again, there's a great book about
Java Client desktop applications.
It was actually written by Brent,
who did the demos in the last session.
This is a really good entry point
for you if you want to know.
It mostly talks about UI generation
direct to Java Client and Java Client,
and also talks a little bit
about the distribution layer.
There's the information
about the documentation.
And that's it.
Thank you.